+++
title = "Best Practices of Scientific Computing"
date = "2020-12-10"
+++

### 1. Use a standard directory structure

In the root directory, always have a simple overview of the project, a to-do list, a communication guide, a citation guide, and a license (if possible, use Creative Commons or MIT-like open source license). Use separate directories for text documents (e.g. `docs`), raw data (e.g. `data`), source code for tasks and pipelines (e.g. `src`), generated files (e.g. `results`), and compiled programs (e.g. `bin`).

### 2. Use version control and back ups

Back up and document sufficiently small changes and synchronize with a remote back up copy at least daily. Use a version control system for sufficiently small, non-fixed, and appropriately formatted files whenever possible, otherwise keep a manual change log by date (often in `CHANGELOG.txt`). Back up the complete project directory at least when large changes have been done.

### 3. Use raw data 

Always save and securely back up read-only raw data as originally generated by the measurement method (or a query from a large database). Retrospectively, get as raw data as possible and precisely describe how it has been modified from the raw data.

### 4. Make clean data

Create clean human- and machine-readable versions of the raw data using open universal file formats, self-explaining variable names, descriptive file names, a tidy tabular structure (columns as variables, rows as observations), and unique identifiers for every observational unit. Don't try to integrate all data into a single table or a single file but instead try to capture some tidy organization in the data. Write a natural language metadata file (`README`) for humans and a structured metadata file for machines. If you don't write reproducible scripts for all data processing task, always document in natural language what was done manually as if you were programming the manual workflow. If possible, submit clean data to a DOI-issuing repository.

### 5. Write programs defensively

Write code that is as self-explanatory as possible and explain how every program works with examples – all embedded in the source code. Reuse existing code and libraries as much as possible on the highest level of abstraction possible. Don't rely on any programs without testing them and always have test inputs as smoke tests. Name variables and functions descriptively; follow the language's naming convention, use nouns for variables, and use verbs for functions. Use if-else statements to control flow of computation, not comments. Finally, submit code to a DOI-issuing repository.

### 6. Write simple documents

Use a text-format that can be rendered to any standard files, like docx, pdf or html, when writing manuscripts or other documents. If not possible, use an online text editor with rich features. Make figures and tables reusable by generating them as standard text-format files in addition to the main visual format.

### 7. Use a reference manager

It lets you collect references to a single file, add references to documents with short tags, and make reference lists automatically at the end of the document. BibTex is a good choice.

### 8. Keep improving your workflow

Start learning more by reading these great papers carefully:

1. Wilson G, Bryan J, Cranston K, Kitzes J, Nederbragt L, Teal TK. Good enough practices in scientific computing. PLoS Comput Biol. 2017;13(6):e1005510. Published 2017 Jun 22. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510
2. Wilson G, Aruliah DA, Brown CT, et al. Best practices for scientific computing. PLoS Biol. 2014;12(1):e1001745. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001745
